improvements to the observabaility strategy (#715)
kyma-project/community: concepts/observability-strategy/configurable-tracing/05-tracing-concept.md

## Architecture Overview

![b](./assets/tracing-future.drawio.svg)

## Simple Auto-Scaling - Tail-based sampling

> An auto-scaling should be possible from the beginning. Hereby, a simple Deployment of the otel-collector will be the best option to achieve a scaling. Only relevant scaling criterias based on incoming traffic needs to be evaluated to scale up/down the replicaset. A single Deployment of the otel-collector requires that sampling decisions are made on the data which is constant and available across all spans of a trace, mainly the traceID. Any other sampling would require to batch trace data and do that batching sticky on dedicated instances. That would require an advanced architecture which could be switched to at a later point in time. A simple sampling approach is acceptable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Auto-scaling should be possible from the beginning. A simple Deployment of the Otel Collector is the best option to achieve scaling. We only have to evaluate the relevant scaling criteria based on incoming traffic to scale the ReplicaSet up and down. A single Deployment of the Otel Collector requires that sampling decisions are made on the data that is constant and available across all spans of a trace, mainly the traceID.
Any other sampling would require to batch trace data, and to do that batching sticky on dedicated instances. That would require an advanced architecture, which we can adopt later.
A simple sampling approach is acceptable for now.
```

I have no idea what this means: `do that batching sticky` ??

## Temporary OpenCensus support

> When introducing the configurable tracing, w3c-tracecontext should be used from the beginning. That requires to use the OpenCensus tracer in the istio configuration. That protocol needs to be supported in the beginning as a receiver till OTLP support is available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When introducing the configurable tracing, w3c-tracecontext should be used from the beginning. That requires to use the OpenCensus tracer in the Istio configuration. Till OTLP support is available, that protocol must be supported as a receiver.
```

## Custom base image

> Not used plugins for the otel-collector should not be installed in the used image to reduce the attack vector. With that a custom bundling of the otel-collector image will be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unused plugins for the Otel Collector should not be installed in the used image to reduce the attack vector. With that, a custom bundling of the Otel Collector image will be used
```

> ## Operator manages the Otel-Collector Deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Operator manages the Otel Collector Deployment
```

> There should be no resource consumption if there is no pipeline defined. That will be achieved by managing the otel-collector fully by the telemetry-operator. So the operator will deploy and configure and potentially also delete the Deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There should be no resource consumption if there is no pipeline defined. To achieve this, the Telemetry Operator will fully manage the Otel Collector; meaning the operator will deploy, configure, and potentially also delete the Deployment.
```

## Action Items

> Following work packages are identified and will be transformed into stories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following work packages are identified and will be transformed into stories:
```

> - build a custom ote-collector image (with receiver for istio traces and tail-based sampling processor)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Build a custom Otel Collector image with a receiver for Istio traces and tail-based sampling processor.
```

> - operator deploys otel-collector if a pipeline is defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a pipeline is defined, the Telemetry Operator deploys Otel Collector.
```

> - operator removes deployment if last pipeline gets deleted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When the last pipeline is deleted,  the Telemetry Operator removes the Deployment.
```

> - Have base settings in place for otel-collector deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Define basic settings for the Otel Collector Deployment.
```

> - Configure otel-collector with tracePipeline settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configure Otel Collector with tracePipeline settings.
```

> - Limit setup to a singular pipeline only (there can be only 0 or 1 pipeline to keep it simple)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Limit the setup to a singular pipeline only. To keep it simple, there can be only 0 or 1 pipeline.
```

> - auto-scaling vs vertical scaling options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Define auto-scaling vs vertical scaling options.
```

> - Expose relevant otel-collector metrics for troubleshooting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Expose relevant Otel Collector metrics for troubleshooting.
```

## Architecture Overview

![b](./assets/tracing-future.drawio.svg)

## Simple Auto-Scaling - Tail-based sampling

Auto-scaling should be possible from the beginning. A simple Deployment of the Otel Collector is the best option to achieve scaling. We only have to evaluate the relevant scaling criteria based on incoming traffic to scale the ReplicaSet up and down. A single Deployment of the Otel Collector requires that sampling decisions are made on the data that is constant and available across all spans of a trace, mainly the traceID.

> Any other sampling would require to batch trace data, and to do that batching sticky on dedicated instances. That would require an advanced architecture, which we can adopt later.

Author: ```suggestion
More advanced sampling like respecting some error status would require to batch all spans for a trace at one instance in order to make a decision. Having a scalable setup would require to introduce another StatefulSet of the Otel Collector and forward the spans for a specific trace always to the same instance of the StatefulSet (sticky). That advanced architecture, can be adopted at a later time.
```

## Simple Auto-Scaling - Tail-based sampling

Auto-scaling should be possible from the beginning. A simple Deployment of the Otel Collector is the best option to achieve scaling. We only have to evaluate the relevant scaling criteria based on incoming traffic to scale the ReplicaSet up and down. A single Deployment of the Otel Collector requires that sampling decisions are made on the data that is constant and available across all spans of a trace, mainly the traceID.

> More advanced sampling like respecting some error status would require to batch all spans for a trace at one instance in order to make a decision. Having a scalable setup would require to introduce another StatefulSet of the Otel Collector and forward the spans for a specific trace always to the same instance of the StatefulSet (sticky). That advanced architecture, can be adopted at a later time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More advanced sampling like respecting some error status would require to batch all spans for a trace at one instance in order to make a decision. Having a scalable setup would require to introduce another StatefulSet of the Otel Collector and forward the spans for a specific trace always to the same instance of the StatefulSet (sticky). That advanced architecture can be adopted at a later time.
```
